+++
template = "page_static.html"
title = "Activity"
date =  2025-06-25
draft = false
tags = ["activity"]
+++


## Bioinformatics?

Using computers and data to answer biological questions. The Bioinformatician collects, analyzes, and interprets the large amounts of data generated by life science research or clinical studies through computing.

It is multidisciplinary, bringing together biologists, computer scientists, mathematicians, statisticians, and physicists. By turning vast raw data into useful information, this approach helps researchers better understand complex systems and diseases, make diagnoses, and develop new medicines.

## Missions

In FLORIMOND DESPREZ GROUP, the missions of the bioinformatician are the following:

###  Implement bioinformatics solution

* Analyse different kinds of omics data on our different crops.
* Develop tools, workflows and software to support plant and molecular breeders in the
analysis and interpretation of their data.
* Optimise tools developed by your colleagues and yourself.
* Design and maintain databases, data storage systems, and data management processes to ensure the integrity and accessibility of biological data.

### Bring expertise

* Provide expertise in next-generation sequencing and microbial genomics to implement state-of-the-art bioinformatics pipelines and comparative genomics approaches.
* Communicate research findings, insights, and recommendations to stakeholders.
* Participate in external and internal projects related to your field of expertise.
* Keep yourself up-to-date with findings from academia and other sources through literature
search and participation to conferences.

### Operational Excellence

* Deliver timely results to meet project deadlines.
* Provide reporting on project contributions.
* Develop robust and documented software components to ensure traceability and reproducibility of your analyses.

